.\" kiri man page — UTF-8
.TH KIRI 1 "June 2026" "kiri v0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kiri \- TUI companion for plant care
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kiri
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kiri
tracks the "thirst level" of indoor and outdoor plants, reminds you when to water,
accounts for season and weather (outdoor plants), and keeps a care log.
.PP
By default it launches a fullscreen interactive TUI with tabs: Plants, Calendar,
Care Log, Settings, About; a card grid, monthly task calendar, mouse and keyboard support.
Data is stored locally in
.IR \(ti/.config/kiri/ .
.PP
On first run the database is seeded with nine demo plants at various thirst levels.
Water level decreases smoothly over time; for outdoor plants the model uses season,
temperature, and yesterday's precipitation (Open\-Meteo API, city in settings).
.PP
.BR \-\-version ,
.BR \-\-status ,
.BR \-\-summary ,
.BR \-\-json
and the interactive TUI are mutually exclusive: only one mode runs
(\fB\-\-version\fR → \fB\-\-status\fR → \fB\-\-summary\fR → \fB\-\-json\fR → TUI).
The
.BR \-\-transparent
flag is compatible only with TUI.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Print version (e.g.
.BR "kiri v0.1.0" )
and exit.
The database is not opened.
.TP
.BR \-\-status
Print a plant status table and exit.
Columns: name (with outdoor/indoor type), thirst bar (10
.BR \(ti█/░\(ti
characters), watering hint (\fBWATER NOW!\fR, \fBAlready watered\fR at level ≥ 80%,
or \fBIn N days\fR).
Language comes from
.IR settings.toml .
Drying since the last update is applied before output (as in TUI); the database is not
modified; auto-backup does not run.
.TP
.BR \-\-summary
Print one line for status bars and scripts and exit
(e.g.
.BR "🌿 kiri: ok"
or
.BR "💧 kiri: 3 need watering!" ).
Urgency logic matches
.BR \-\-status ;
the database is not modified.
.TP
.BR \-\-json
Print all plants as a JSON array and exit.
Fields
.B needs_watering,
.B watering_due_date,
.B days_until_watering
are computed like
.BR \-\-status ;
field
.B next_action
is an English model hint (not shown in TUI).
The database is not modified.
.TP
.BR \-\-transparent
Launch TUI without background fills and save
.B transparent_mode = true
to
.IR settings.toml .
Equivalent to Transparent Mode in Settings.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Brief flag help.
.SH INTERACTIVE MODE
Without
.BR \-\-version ", " \-\-status ", " \-\-summary ", " \-\-json
the TUI opens.
.SS Startup splash
On start (unless Fast Boot / \fBfast_boot\fR is enabled) an ASCII-logo splash with
animated fog is shown (~2 s reveal, ~1 s hold, ~0.7 s fade).
.br
.B Enter
skips the splash;
.B q
/
.B Ctrl+C
quits.
Disable permanently: Settings → Fast Boot (\fBfast_boot\fR in \fIsettings.toml\fR).
.SS Tabs and global keys
.TP
.B Tab ", " Shift+Tab ", " 1\(en5
Switch tabs (plants, calendar, care log, settings, about).
.TP
.B q ", " Ctrl+C
Quit.
.PP
Mouse is supported (tabs, cards, calendar, log, settings, footer).
On terminals without TrueColor, background fills are disabled automatically (unless
.BR \-\-transparent ).
.SS Plants tab
.TP
.B h ", " j ", " k ", " l ", " ← ", " → ", " ↑ ", " ↓
Navigate the card grid.
.TP
.B w
Water (level → 100%).
.TP
.B s
Postpone watering (+postpone_boost_percent, default +15%).
.TP
.B a ", " e ", " d
Add, edit, or delete a plant.
.SS Calendar, care log, settings
Calendar: move by day (\fBh/j/k/l\fR, arrows), \fBEnter\fR — day's tasks,
\fBSpace\fR — mark watering done.
.br
Care log: \fBj/k\fR, \fBPgUp/PgDn\fR — scroll.
.br
Settings: \fBh/l\fR — language and numeric options; \fBEnter\fR/\fBc\fR — city search;
\fBt\fR — transparent mode; \fBb\fR — manual backup.
.SH WATERING MODEL
Each plant has a water level from 100% to 0% that decreases smoothly (proportional to
hours, not a once-per-day step).
Daily loss rate:
.PP
.RS
ΔV = (100 / watering_interval) × K_season × K_temp
.RE
.PP
\fBK_season\fR — outdoor plants only (indoor: 1.0).
Defaults in \fB[model.season]\fR: winter 0.5, spring 1.0, summer 1.5, autumn 0.75.
.br
\fBK_temp\fR — from air temperature (\fB[model.temp]\fR): T ≤ 20°C → 0.8; 21–27°C → 1.0;
T > 27°C → 1.0 + (T − 27) × 0.05.
.PP
Watering dates on cards and in the calendar use \fB[model].fallback_temp_c\fR
(default 22°C) when live weather is unavailable.
Level ≤ 0% means water today.
.PP
Manual actions: \fBWater\fR (\fBw\fR) → 100%; \fBPostpone\fR (\fBs\fR) → +postpone_boost_percent
(default +15%, max 100%).
After postpone_suggest_after consecutive postpones (default 2) the TUI suggests
increasing the base interval.
.SS Precipitation (outdoor only)
Yesterday's precipitation (Open\-Meteo, thresholds in \fB[model.rain]\fR):
.TP
< light_mm (1 mm)
No change.
.TP
light_mm … heavy_mm (1–10 mm)
Light rain: status shifted_by_rain, watering shifted, level rises.
.TP
> heavy_mm (10 mm)
Heavy rain: level → 100%, "watered by rain".
.PP
Full formulas and coefficient tables — in
.B USER_GUIDE.ru.md
(see
.BR "SEE ALSO" ).
.SH CONFIGURATION
File
.I \(ti/.config/kiri/settings.toml
(XDG).
Edit only while
.B kiri
is not running.
.SS Main settings
Language (\fBru\fR/\fBen\fR), \fBauto_backup\fR, \fBtransparent_mode\fR, \fBfast_boot\fR
(skip splash), \fBdefault_interval_days\fR, \fBweather_refresh_minutes\fR (1–1440),
\fB[weather_city]\fR block.
.SS Section [model]
Watering model coefficients without rebuild; zero or invalid values fall back to
built-in defaults.
Subsections: \fB[model]\fR, \fB[model.season]\fR, \fB[model.rain]\fR, \fB[model.temp]\fR
(fallback_temp_c, water_soon_percent, postpone_boost_percent, postpone_suggest_after,
season/rain/temp fields — details in
.B USER_GUIDE.ru.md ).
.PP
CLI
.BR \-\-status
shows "Already watered" at level ≥ 80%; TUI thirst bar colors (green/yellow/red)
use separate thresholds and are not tied to \fBwater_soon_percent\fR.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/kiri/data.db
SQLite database: plants and care log.
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/kiri/settings.toml
Application and model settings (see
.B CONFIGURATION
and
.B USER_GUIDE.ru.md ).
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/kiri/data.db.bak
.TP
.I \(ti/.config/kiri/settings.toml.bak
Backups from auto-backup or manual backup in Settings.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B COLORTERM
If set to \fBtruecolor\fR or \fB24bit\fR, TrueColor background fills are enabled
(unless transparent mode is on).
.TP
.B TERM
Terminal type; used to detect color capabilities.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (database, CLI output, TUI runtime, etc.).
.SH EXAMPLES
Print version:
.PP
.RS
.B kiri \-\-version
.RE
.PP
Quick watering check for scripts:
.PP
.RS
.B kiri \-\-summary
.RE
.PP
Data dump for integrations:
.PP
.RS
.B kiri \-\-json | jq '.[] | select(.needs_watering)'
.RE
.PP
Transparent background (tiling WM):
.PP
.RS
.B kiri \-\-transparent
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
Full user guide:
.B USER_GUIDE.ru.md
in the repository (Russian).
Overview:
.B README.md
/
.B README.ru.md
.
.br
Repository:
.RB < https://github.com/freislot/kiri >
.br
Russian manual:
.BR "man -L ru kiri" .
.SH AUTHOR
Pavel Antonov
.RB < freislot@gmail.com >
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Antonov Pavel.
License MIT.
